IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, VOL. 18, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2024 1669
Approximate Optimal Strategy for Multiagent
System Pursuit–Evasion Game
Zhiqiang Xu , Dengxiu Y u , Member , IEEE, Y an-Jun Liu , Senior Member , IEEE,
and Zhen Wang , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—In this article, we propose an approximate optimal
control strategy for a class of nonlinear multiagent system pursuit–
evasion games. Herein, multiple pursuers aim to capture multiple
evaders trying to evade capture. Under the competitive framework,
agents not only pursue their individual goals but also consider
coordination with their teammates to achieve collective objectives.
However, maintaining cohesion with teammates in existing dis-
tributed control methods has always been a challenge. To enhance
team coordination, we employ a graph-theoretic approach to rep-
resent the relationships between agents. Based on this, we design
a dynamic target graph algorithm to enhance the coordination
among pursuers. The approximate optimal strategies for each agent
are solved by utilizing the Hamilton–Jacobi–Isaacs equations of
the system. As solving these equations becomes computationally
intensive in multiagent scenarios, we propose a value-based sin-
gle network adaptive critic network architecture. In addition, we
consider scenarios where the numbers of agents on both sides
are inconsistent and address the phenomenon of input saturation.
Moreover, we provide sufﬁcient conditions to prove the system’s sta-
bility. Finally, simulations conducted in two representative scenar-
ios, multiple-pursuer-one-evader and multiple-pursuer-multiple-
evader, demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm.
Index Terms —Approximate optimal control, multiagent
systems, pursuit–evasion games, reinforcement learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
I
N THE past decades, the pursuit–evasion (PE) game has
emerged as a prominent and intriguing research topic, draw-
ing signiﬁcant attention. The pursuers and evaders, which partic-
ipate in the PE game and possess capabilities in perception, com-
munication, and action, are collectively referred to as agents. The
multiagent system pursuit–evasion (MPE) game is a complex ex-
tension of the PE game, involving multiple agents. Speciﬁcally,
the objective of the pursuers is to minimize the distance to their
targeted evaders and achieve interception while the evaders aim
to evade or delay interception. Unlike evaders who engage in
passive avoidance, pursuers possess the ﬂexibility to select dif-
ferent targets as their objectives. The MPE game initially arose in
Manuscript received 20 December 2023; revised 7 June 2024; accepted 20 July
2024. Date of publication 2 August 2024; date of current version 20 September
2024. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62373302. (Corresponding author: Yan-Jun Liu.)
Zhiqiang Xu is with the Unmanned System Research Institute, Northwest-
ern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China (e-mail: zhiqiangxu@mail.
nwpu.edu.cn).
Dengxiu Y u and Zhen Wang are with the School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Optics and Electronics, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072,
China (e-mail: yudengxiu@nwpu.edu.cn; w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn).
Y an-Jun Liu is with the College of Science, Liaoning University of Technol-
ogy, Jinzhou 121001, China (e-mail: liuyanjun@live.com).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSYST.2024.3432796
natural animal hunting scenarios and have since been further de-
veloped with the concepts of game theory. The MPE game ﬁnds
wide engineering applications in areas, such as autonomous
aerial vehicles, satellites, mobile robot systems, vicinagearth
security, and sports/game strategy [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6].
The single-pursuer single-evader game was initially studied
based on the differential game framework involving two players,
which is a zero-sum game. In most PE games, the pursuer’s
objective of minimizing the distance to the evader is represented
through value functions. These individual performance indices
are then used to deﬁne equilibrium points of the game [7].B y
differentiating the value functions, Jang and Tomlin[8] achieved
PE between aircraft. Jagat and Sinclair [9] based on the state-
dependent Riccati equation methods designed a nonlinear con-
trol approach for the spacecraft PE game. Later, the PE game was
extended to the multiple-pursuer single-evader scenario [10],
where pursuers can form certain formations through formation
control. When the PE game is extended to the multiple-pursuer
multiple-evader scenario, it is referred to as MPE [11].I n [12],
different types of pursuers are designed, and the PE relation-
ships are studied based on an N -player nonzero-sum game
framework.
In MPE scenarios with multiple agents, the relationships
among them become more complex [13], [14], [15]. To handle
these relationships, graph-theoretic approaches have been uti-
lized, as demonstrated in [16] and [17] and applied to PE games
with linear dynamics in [11].I n [18], the pursuer, acting as a
child node, is paired with the evader acting as a parent node; this
topological relationship is ﬁxed. Consequently, when assistance
is required from another child node’s pursuers, the inability
to change the topological relationship leads to an inability to
leverage team effectiveness. In [17], the MPE game is decom-
posed into several MPE game subsystems. While the behavior
within each subsystem does not inﬂuence the stability of the
overall environment, there is an inherent lack of collaborative
interaction between the subsystems themselves. These methods
design value functions that take into account the state difference
with respect to the goal or neighboring nodes. Although each
distributed strategy is goal-oriented, agents within the same team
lack communication and collaboration. Therefore, achieving
coordinated control with team collaboration remains a challenge
in many distributed control algorithms [19], [20]. Consequently,
the complex interactions among multiple agents to enhance
team cohesion merit in-depth research [21]. Consensus, which
is extensively studied for multiagent system control using graph
theory [22], is often achieved in the context of formation control
by deﬁning desired displacements [23]. In this work, while
enhancing cohesion through target switching, the role of desired
displacements is also considered.
1937-9234 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on December 24,2025 at 05:16:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 